# Environment Setup - Node Setup

This document outlines the steps to set up local nodes for a Kubernetes cluster using k3s on three devices: a Raspberry Pi 5, a Samsung laptop (galaxy-node), and an Acer laptop (aspire-node). Additionally, it covers the setup of Terraform on a local machine to manage the Kubernetes cluster.

## Local Node Setup

Setps related to setting up local nodes for kubernetes clusters. Here are the local environment specifications:

- Raspberry Pi 5
  - OS: Ubuntu 24.04.2 LTS
  - CPU: ARM Cortex-A76 (4 cores @ 2.4GHz)
  - RAM: 8GB LPDDR4X
  - Storage: 240GB NVME
  - Network: Gigabit Ethernet (1Gbps)
- Samsung Old Laptop (Samsung np270e5v)
  - OS: Ubuntu 24.04.2 LTS
  - CPU: Intel Core 3-3120M (2 cores @ 2.5GHz)
  - RAM: 16GB DDR3
  - Storage: 240GB SSD + 1TB HDD
  - Network: Gigabit Ethernet (300Mbps)
- Acer Old Laptop (Acer N16C1)
  - OS: Debian 12
  - CPU: Intel Celeron N3350 (2 cores @ 2.3GHz)
  - RAM: 8GB DDR3
  - Storage: 240GB SSD + 2TB HDD
  - Network: Gigabit Ethernet (1Gbps)

### Common Steps for the devices:

1. Install Ubuntu 24.04.2 LTS and Debian 12 on the devices.
2. Setup static IP addresses for the devices.
3. Install docker and its components (https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/ubuntu/).
4. Disable swap:
   - `sudo swapoff -a`
   - `sudo nano /etc/fstab` (comment out any swap entries)
   - remove any swap files if present.
5. Install k3s based on the following guide: https://docs.k3s.io/quick-start
   - For Raspberry Pi (Master Node):
     - `curl -sfL https://get.k3s.io | INSTALL_K3S_EXEC="--disable traefik" sh -`
     - Note down the K3S_TOKEN from `/var/lib/rancher/k3s/server/node-token` and the IP address of the Raspberry Pi.
   - For Samsung and Acer Laptops (Worker Nodes):
     - `curl -sfL https://get.k3s.io | K3S_URL=https://<master-node-ip>:6443 K3S_TOKEN=<token> sh -`

### For Acer Laptop:
Due to Acer's restrictive UEFI and hardware freezes without a battery, follow these specific recovery steps using the galaxy-node as a host.

1. Manual User & Sudo Configuration (Chroot)
If the installer finishes but lacks a user or sudo, attach the boot SSD to the `galaxy-node` and run:

         # Mount partitions (Adjust /dev/sdX based on lsblk)
         sudo mount /dev/sdc2 /mnt       # Root partition
         sudo mount /dev/sdc1 /mnt/boot/efi # EFI partition
         for i in /dev /dev/pts /proc /sys /run; do sudo mount -B $i /mnt$i; done
         sudo chroot /mnt

         # Create user and set passwords
         useradd -m -s /bin/bash debian
         passwd debian
         passwd root

         # Install sudo and grant access
         apt update && apt install sudo
         usermod -aG sudo debian

2. EFI Population & Windows Masking
To bypass the "No Bootable Device" error in Acer Laptops, mask the Debian bootloader as a Windows installation using above chroot:

         cd /boot/efi/EFI
         sudo mkdir -p Microsoft/Boot
         # Copy debian boot files to the Microsoft path
         sudo cp -r /boot/efi/EFI/debian/* /boot/efi/EFI/Microsoft/Boot/
         # Rename the shim to trick the BIOS
         sudo mv /boot/efi/EFI/Microsoft/Boot/shimx64.efi /boot/efi/EFI/Microsoft/Boot/bootmgfw.efi
   
         # Update GRUB and exit
         update-grub
         exit
         sudo umount -R /mnt

> Extra:
>
> - Raspberry Pi has its own Custom Monitoring using a OLED display through GPIO pins. Create a SSH tunnel from Raspberry Pi to other devices to generate metrics. (Execute: `ssh-keygen -t rsa`, and `ssh-copy-id user@new_node_ip_address`)
> - Set `HandleLidSwitch=ignore`, `HandleLidSwitchExternalPower=ignore` and `LidSwitchIgnoreInhibited=no` in `/etc/systemd/logind.conf` and run `systemctl restart systemd-logind` to prevent laptops from sleeping when lid is closed.
> - Setup screen timeout to 30sec for power saving in both Samsung and Acer Laptop: Add `consoleblank=300` to `GRUB_CMDLINE_LINUX_DEFAULT` in `/etc/default/grub` and run `sudo update-grub`. (Remove `quiet` to see boot messages)

## Terraform Setup

1. Install Terraform on local machine (or wsl). Enable auto-complete. (https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/tutorials/aws-get-started/install-cli).
2. Setup alias for terraform commands.
   - `alias tf='terraform'`
3. Copy the kubeconfig file from the Raspberry Pi to the local machine: (also copy the config to Terraform folder as: `kube-config.yaml`)
   - `sudo cat /etc/rancher/k3s/k3s.yaml` (on Raspberry Pi)
   - Copy the content and save it as `~/.kube/config` on the local machine as well as k3s server.
   - Update Server URL in kubeconfig
4. Install kubectl on local machine (or wsl). (https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/install-kubectl-linux/).
5. Configure alias and auto-complete for kubectl (https://stackoverflow.com/questions/52905811/kubernetes-kubectl-bash-completion-with-alias).
6. Verify kubectl access:
   - `k get nodes`
